Add 329 release notes (#2559)
prestosql/presto: presto-docs/src/main/sphinx/release/release-329.rst

=========================
Release 329 (XXX 2020)
=========================

General Changes
---------------

* Fix incorrect result of ``last_day_of_month`` function for first day of month. (:issue:`2452`)
* Handle common disk failures during the spill. When on of disks got broken, it Presto will use another
  one without failing the query. (:issue:`2444`)

> * Reduce number of metadata queries when querying ``information_schema``. (:issue:`2488`)

Reviewer: end-user visible impact is "faster" or "improve performance"; maybe also "reduce metastore load":
```
* Improve performance and reduce load on external systems when querying ``information_schema``. (:issue:`2488`)
```

* Limit broadcasted table size to 100MB by default when using the ``AUTOMATIC`` join reordering strategy. (:issue:`2527`)

Security Changes
----------------

* Add ``ldap.bind-dn`` and ``ldap.bind-password`` LDAP properties to allow LDAP authentication
  access LDAP server using service account. (:issue:`1917`)

CLI Changes
-----------

> * Allow inspecting network requests. (:issue:`2524`)

Author: How?

Reviewer: By enabling DEBUG on `io.prestosql.cli.QueryRunner` via CLI's `--log-levels-file` switch

(`presto-cli --log-levels-file <(echo "io.prestosql.cli.QueryRunner=DEBUG")`)

Author: maybe add "... by enabling DEBUG logging for `io.prestosql.cli.QueryRunner`" ?

Reviewer: good idea

Reviewer 2: This is not network requests, simply the URL. I think we should add first class support for printing network requests. I'm not sure this is even worth documenting.

Reviewer: don't have strong opinion. I'm fine either way

Author: Ok, I'll remove it then

Hive Connector Changes
----------------------

* Fix incorrect data returned when using S3 Select on uncompressed files. In our testing, S3 Select
  was apparently returning incorrect results when reading uncompressed files, so S3 Select is disabled
  for uncompressed files. (:issue:`2399`)
* Fix incorrect data returned when using S3 Select on a table with ``skip.header.line.count`` or
  ``skip.footer.line.count`` property. S3 Select API does not support skipping footers or more than one
  line of a header.  In our testing, S3 Select was apparently sometimes returning incorrect results when
  reading a compressed file with header skipping, so S3 Select is disabled when any of these table
  properties is set to non-zero value. (:issue:`2399`)
* Fix ``INSERT`` or ``CREATE TABLE ... AS`` query failure when one of the inserted ``REAL`` or ``DOUBLE`` values

>   is infinite or ``NaN``. (:issue:`2471`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  is infinite or ``NaN`` and column statistics collection is not disabled. (:issue:`2471`)
```

(it's on by default)

> * Add explicit support for conversion from Parquet decimal column type to Presto integer column types. (:issue:`2451`)

Reviewer: ```
* Support reading data when column is declared as an integer type on partition level but is a decimal type
  in Parquet file. (:issue:`2451`)
```

@sopel39 is this a regression fix?

Reviewer 3: @findepi It wasn't explicitly supported (by coincidence really), but yes, it worked before.

> * Add validation of Parquet decimal column type scale. (:issue:`2451`)

Reviewer: @sopel39 what's end-user visible effect?

Reviewer 2: Based on the tests, I think this can be
```
* Validate the scale of decimal types when reading Parquet files. This prevents
  incorrect results when the decimal scale in the file does not match the declared
  type for the table or partition. (:issue:`2451`)

Reviewer 2: Actually, this is part of the change above that allows reading these at all, so I'm not sure that it was possible to get incorrect results previously. Maybe it's correct to remove this?

Reviewer 3: Maybe something like this?
`Prevent incorrect reading of decimal values from Parquet decimal columns, which don't match partition level decimal column type`

Reviewer 3: > Actually, this is part of the change above that allows reading these at all, so I'm not sure that it was possible to get incorrect results previously. Maybe it's correct to remove this?

It was possible as long as both decimals were of the same type (e.g short or long). Parquet code was just inserting unscaled values...

> * Delete HDFS location when dropping an empty schema. (:issue:`2463`)

Reviewer: @ebyhr is it specific to HDFS? does it apply to S3 or other storages too?

Reviewer 2: It applies to all storage locations, so we can replace "HDFS" with "storage"

> * Execute table and partition drops in parallel. (:issue:`1812`)

Reviewer: ```
* Improve performance when deleting multiple partitions of a table or multiple partitions in a transaction
  by executing these actions concurrently. (:issue:`1812`)
```

> * Use listobject v2 of S3 API. (:issue:`2236`)

Reviewer: @sopel39 what's end-user visible effect?

Reviewer 2: I don't think there is any end user visible effect.

=========================

> Release 329 (XXX 2020)

Author: This needs to be updated before release

=========================

General Changes
---------------

> * Fix incorrect result of ``last_day_of_month`` function for first day of month. (:issue:`2452`)

Reviewer 2: Link to function and say "for" instead of "of"
```
* Fix incorrect result for :func:`last_day_of_month` function for first day of month. (:issue:`2452`)

> * Handle common disk failures during spill. When one of disks got broken, it

Reviewer 2: ```
* Handle common disk failures during spill. When one disks fails, another
  disk will be used automatically without failing the query. (:issue:`2444`)

  Presto will use another one without failing the query. (:issue:`2444`)
* Improve performance and reduce load on external systems when
  querying ``information_schema``. (:issue:`2488`)

> * Limit broadcasted table size to 100MB by default when using the ``AUTOMATIC``

Reviewer 2: Code quotes around size value

  join type selection strategy. (:issue:`2527`)
* Hide non-standard columns ``comment`` and ``extra_info`` in the standard
  ``information_schema.columns`` table. These columns can still be selected,
  but will no longer appear when describing the table. (:issue:`2306`)

> * Enable ``AUTOMATIC`` join reordering and join type selection strategy by default. (:issue:`2528`)

Reviewer: I think it would be more informative if supplemented with "CBO" and "Cost-Based Optimizer".
Otherwise this is very easy to overlook

Author: I don't like using the term CBO -- it's too opaque. And "cost-based optimizer" is a little too generic, since it's not a general purpose cost-based optimizer. It only applies to join reordering and type selection. Maybe we can just link to the corresponding sections under https://prestosql.io/docs/current/optimizer/cost-based-optimizations.html

Security Changes
----------------

* Add ``ldap.bind-dn`` and ``ldap.bind-password`` LDAP properties to allow LDAP authentication
  access LDAP server using service account. (:issue:`1917`)

CLI Changes
-----------

* Allow inspecting network requests. (:issue:`2524`)

Hive Connector Changes
----------------------

* Fix incorrect data returned when using S3 Select on uncompressed files. In our testing, S3 Select
  was apparently returning incorrect results when reading uncompressed files, so S3 Select is disabled
  for uncompressed files. (:issue:`2399`)
* Fix incorrect data returned when using S3 Select on a table with ``skip.header.line.count`` or
  ``skip.footer.line.count`` property. S3 Select API does not support skipping footers or more than one
  line of a header.  In our testing, S3 Select was apparently sometimes returning incorrect results when
  reading a compressed file with header skipping, so S3 Select is disabled when any of these table
  properties is set to non-zero value. (:issue:`2399`)

> * Fix ``INSERT`` or ``CREATE TABLE ... AS`` query failure when one of the inserted ``REAL`` or ``DOUBLE`` values

Reviewer 2: ```
* Fix query failure for writes when one of the inserted ``REAL`` or ``DOUBLE`` values
  is infinite or ``NaN`` and column statistics collection is enabled. (:issue:`2471`)

  is infinite or ``NaN`` and column statistics collection is not disabled. (:issue:`2471`)

> * Support reading data when column is declared as an integer type on partition level but is a decimal type

Reviewer 2: ```
* Allow reading data from Parquet files when the column type is declared as ``INTEGER``
  in the table or partition, but is a ``DECIMAL`` type in the file. (:issue:`2451`)
```

  in Parquet file. (:issue:`2451`)
* Add validation of Parquet decimal column type scale. (:issue:`2451`)
* Delete storage location when dropping an empty schema. (:issue:`2463`)

> * Improve performance when deleting multiple partitions of a table or multiple partitions in a transaction

Reviewer 2: Maybe shorten this to

> Improve performance when deleting multiple partitions by executing these actions concurrently.

=========================
Release 329 (XXX 2020)
=========================

General Changes
---------------

* Fix incorrect result for :func:`last_day_of_month` function for first day of month. (:issue:`2452`)
* Fix incorrect results when handling ``DOUBLE`` or ``REAL`` types with ``NaN`` values. (:issue:`2582`)

> * Handle common disk failures during spill. When one disks fails, another

Reviewer: disks -> disk

=========================
Release 329 (XXX 2020)
=========================

General Changes
---------------

* Fix incorrect result for :func:`last_day_of_month` function for first day of month. (:issue:`2452`)
* Fix incorrect results when handling ``DOUBLE`` or ``REAL`` types with ``NaN`` values. (:issue:`2582`)
* Handle common disk failures during spill. When one disk fails, another

>   disk will be used automatically without failing the query. (:issue:`2444`)

Reviewer: This is promising too much. Maybe

```
* Handle common disk failures during spill. When one disk fails but multiple
  spill locations are configured, the healthy disks will be used for future queries.
  (:issue:`2444`)
```

* Improve performance and reduce load on external systems when
  querying ``information_schema``. (:issue:`2488`)
* Limit broadcasted table size to ``100MB`` by default when using the ``AUTOMATIC``

>   join type selection strategy. (:issue:`2527`)

Reviewer: end-user impact could be described as:
```
... This avoid query failures or excessive memory usage when joining two or more very large tables.
```

* Hide non-standard columns ``comment`` and ``extra_info`` in the standard
  ``information_schema.columns`` table. These columns can still be selected,
  but will no longer appear when describing the table. (:issue:`2306`)
* Enable :doc:`cost based </optimizer/cost-based-optimizations>` join reordering and join type selection
  optimizations by default. The previous behavior can be restored by
  setting ``optimizer.join-reordering-strategy`` configuration property to ``ELIMINATE_CROSS_JOINS``

>   and ``join-distribution-type`` to ``PARTITIONED``. (:issue:`2528`)

Reviewer: Move this next to (just above?) "Limit broadcasted table size" bullet

Security Changes
----------------

* Add ``ldap.bind-dn`` and ``ldap.bind-password`` LDAP properties to allow LDAP authentication
  access LDAP server using service account. (:issue:`1917`)

Hive Connector Changes
----------------------

* Fix incorrect data returned when using S3 Select on uncompressed files. In our testing, S3 Select
  was apparently returning incorrect results when reading uncompressed files, so S3 Select is disabled
  for uncompressed files. (:issue:`2399`)
* Fix incorrect data returned when using S3 Select on a table with ``skip.header.line.count`` or
  ``skip.footer.line.count`` property. S3 Select API does not support skipping footers or more than one
  line of a header.  In our testing, S3 Select was apparently sometimes returning incorrect results when
  reading a compressed file with header skipping, so S3 Select is disabled when any of these table
  properties is set to non-zero value. (:issue:`2399`)
* Fix query failure for writes when one of the inserted ``REAL`` or ``DOUBLE`` values

>   is infinite or ``NaN`` and column statistics collection is enabled. (:issue:`2471`)

Reviewer: Originally i worded this as "and column statistics collection is not disabled", because it's enabled by default.

Maybe we should just omit that part?

Reviewer 2: The phrase "is not disabled" sounds like a double negative, but I see your point. Omit sounds good.

* Allow reading data from Parquet files when the column type is declared as ``INTEGER``
  in the table or partition, but is a ``DECIMAL`` type in the file. (:issue:`2451`)
* Validate the scale of decimal types when reading Parquet files. This prevents
  incorrect results when the decimal scale in the file does not match the declared
  type for the table or partition. (:issue:`2451`)
* Delete storage location when dropping an empty schema. (:issue:`2463`)
* Improve performance when deleting multiple partitions by executing these actions concurrently. (:issue:`1812`)
* Improve performance for queries containing ``IN`` predicates over bucketing columns. (:issue:`2277`)
* Add procedure ``system.drop_stats()`` to remove the column statistics
  for a table or selected partitions. (:issue:`2538`)

Elasticsearch Connector Changes
-------------------------------

* Add support for :ref:`elasticsearch-array-types`. (:issue:`2441`)
* Reduce load on Elasticsearch cluster and improve query performance. (:issue:`2561`)

PostgreSQL Connector Changes
----------------------------

* Fix mapping between PostgreSQL's ``TIME`` and Presto's ``TIME`` data types.

>   Previously the mapping was converting values incorrectly, shifting it by relative offset between

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Previously the mapping was incorrect, shifting the values by relative offset between
```

* Add support for :ref:`elasticsearch-array-types`. (:issue:`2441`)
* Reduce load on Elasticsearch cluster and improve query performance. (:issue:`2561`)

PostgreSQL Connector Changes
----------------------------

* Fix mapping between PostgreSQL's ``TIME`` and Presto's ``TIME`` data types.

>   Previously the mapping was converting values incorrectly, shifting it by relative offset between

Reviewer 2: > by the relative offset between the session zone and the Presto server's JVM zone
